if you saw a wormhole in reality it
would appear round spherical a bit like
a black hole light from the other side
passes through and gives you a window to
a faraway place once crossed the other
side comes for the interview with your
old home now receding into that
shimmering spherical window but are
wormholes real or are they just magic
disguised as physics amass if they are
real how do they work and where can we
find them for most of human history we
thought space was pretty simple a big
flat stage where the events of the
universe unfold even if you take down
the set of planets and stars there's
still something left that empty stage is
space and it exists unchanging and
eternal Einstein's theory of relativity
changed that it says that space and time
make up that stage together and they
aren't the same everywhere the things on
the stage can affect the stage itself
stretching and warping it if the old
stage was like unmoving hardwood
Einstein stage is more like a waterbed
this kind of elastic space can be bent
and maybe even torn and patched together
which could make wormholes possible
let's see what that would look like in
2d our universe is like a big flat sheet
bent in just the right way wormholes
could connect to very very distant spots
with a short bridge that you could cross
almost instantaneously enabling you to
travel the universe even faster than the
speed of light so where can we find a
wormhole presently only on paper general
relativity says they might be possible
but that doesn't mean they have to exist
general relativity is a mathematical
theory it's a set of equations that have
many possible answers but not all maths
describes reality
but they are theoretically possible and
there are different kinds the first kind
of wormholes to be theorized were
einstein-rosen bridges they describe
every black hole as a sort of portal to
an infinite parallel universe let's try
to picture them in 2d again empty space
time is flat but curved by objects on it
if we compress that object space-time
gets more curved around it eventually
space-time becomes so warped that it has
no choice but to collapse into a black
hole a one-way barrier forms the event
horizon which anything can enter but
nothing can escape trapped forever at
the singularity at its core but maybe
there is no singularity here one
possibility is that the other side of
the event horizon looks a bit like our
universe again but mirrored upside down
and where time runs backwards in our
universe things fall into the black hole
in the parallel universe with backwards
time the mirror black hole is spewing
things out a bit like a big bag this is
called a white hole unfortunately in
stein rosen bridges can't actually be
crossed it takes an infinite amount of
time to cross over to the opposite
universe and they crimp shut in the
middle if you go into a black hole you
won't become the stuff coming out of the
white hole you'll only become dead so to
travel the cosmos in the blink of an eye
humans need a different kind of wormhole
a traversable wormhole
[Music]
if string theory or one of its
variations is the correct description of
our universe
then we could be lucky and our universe
might even have a tangled web of
countless wormholes already shortly
after the Big Bang quantum fluctuations
in the universe at the smallest scales
far far smaller than an atom may have
created many many traversable wormholes
threaded through them are strings called
cosmic strings in the first billionth of
a trillionth of a second after the Big
Bang the ends of these tiny tiny
wormholes were pulled light-years apart
scattering them through the universe if
wormholes were made in the early
universe whether with cosmic strings or
some other way they could be all over
just waiting to be discovered
one might even be closer than we realize
from the outside black holes and
wormholes can look very similar leading
some physicists to suggest the
supermassive black holes in the center
of galaxies are actually wormholes it
will be very hard to go all the way to
the center of the Milky Way to find out
though but that's okay there might be an
equally extremely hard way to get our
hands on a wormhole we could try to make
one
[Music]
to be traversable and useful there are a
few properties we want to wormhole to
have first it must obviously connect to
distant parts of space-time like your
bedroom and the bathroom or earth and
Jupiter second it should not contain any
event horizons which would block two-way
travel third it should be sufficiently
sized so that the gravitational forces
don't kill human travelers the biggest
problem we have to solve is keeping our
wormholes open no matter how we make
wormholes gravity tries to close them
gravity wants to pinch it closed and cut
the bridge leaving only black holes at
the ends whether it's a traversable
wormhole with both ends and ours or a
wormhole to another universe it will try
to close unless we have something
propping it open for very old string
theory wormholes that's the cosmic
strings job for manmade wormholes
we need a new ingredient exotic matter
this isn't anything like we find on
earth or even antimatter it's something
totally new different and exciting with
crazy properties like nothing that's
ever been seen before exotic matter is
stuff that has a negative mass positive
mass like people and planets and
everything else in the universe is
attractive because of gravity but
negative mass would be repulsive it
would push you away this makes a kind of
anti-gravity the props open our
wormholes and exotic matter must exert
enormous pressure to push space-time
open greater even than the pressure and
the Centers of neutron stars with exotic
matter we could weave space-time however
we see fit
we may even have a candidate for this
exotic matter the vacuum of space itself
quantum fluctuations in empty space are
constantly creating pairs of particles
and antiparticles only for them to be
annihilated and instant later the vacuum
of space is boiling with them and we can
already manipulate them to produce an
effect similar to the negative mass
we're looking for we could use this to
stabilize our wormholes once we're
keeping it open the ends would start
together so we'd have to move them
around to interesting places we could
start by wiring the solar system leaving
one end of each wormhole in orbit around
the earth we could fling others into
deep space the earth could be a wormhole
hub for a vast interstellar human
civilization spread over light-years but
only a wormhole away however wormholes
have a dark side even opening a single
wormhole kind of breaks the universe in
fundamental ways potentially creating
time travel paradoxes and violating the
causal structure of the universe many
scientists think that this not only
means they should be impossible to make
but that it's impossible for them to
exist at all so for now we only know
that wormholes exist in our hearts and
on paper in the form of equations we
know you want to know more about
universe stuff so we're trying something
new
cortzar - and brilliant - are
collaborating on a six-part video series
about our favorite science and space
things thanks to their help there will
be more videos on this channel in the
next six months cuts out has worked with
brilliant for a while now and we love
what they're doing in a nutshell
brilliant helps you to get ahead by
mastering maths and science skills
through actively solving challenging and
fascinating problems to support our
collaboration with them visit brilliant
dot org slash nutshell and sign up for
free today
the first 688 people that used the link
will get 20% off their annual premium
subscription
you
[Music]